arXiv:2005.13168v1 [math.GT] 27 May 2020                                 IMMERSED FLAT RIBBON KNOTS

                                                             JOSEī AYALA, DAVID KIRSZENBLAT, AND JOACHIM HYAM RUBINSTEIN

                                                    Abstract. We study the minimum ribbonlength for immersed planar ribbon knots and links.
                                                    Our approach is to embed the space of such knots and links into a larger more tractable space
                                                    of disk diagrams. When length minimisers in disk diagram space are ribbon, then these solve
                                                    the ribbonlength problem. We also provide examples when minimisers in the space of disk
                                                    diagrams are not ribbon and state some conjectures. We compute the minimal ribbonlength
                                                    of some small knot and link diagrams and certain infinite families of link diagrams. Finally we
                                                    present a bound for the number of crossings for a diagram yielding the minimum ribbonlength
                                                    of a knot or link amongst all diagrams.

                                                                                          1. Introduction

                                             A flat ribbon knot is an immersion of an annulus into the Euclidean plane such that the
                                          core of the annulus corresponds to an immersed knot diagram. Flat ribbon links then are a
                                          finite union of flat ribbon knots. We require that the combinatorics of the self-intersections of
                                          the knot or link match that of the associated immersed annulus or annuli. The ribbonlength
                                          problem aims to find the minimal ratio between the length of the core to the ribbon width over
                                          all the planar realisations in a knot or link type. We normalise our ribbons so that the ribbon
                                          width is 2 as can be done by a suitable homothety of the plane.

                                             Kauffman [7] proposed a model for folded flat ribbon knots whose core is piecewise linear.
                                          He gave conjectures about the ribbonlength of the trefoil and the figure-eight knot. Currently,
                                          results in the literature provide bounds on the ribbonlength of flat folded ribbons knots for
                                          certain families of torus knots. The ribbonlength problem remains open for general immersed
                                          and folded ribbon knots. A good survey on flat folded ribbon knots can be found in [3]. Denne,
                                          Sullivan and Wrinkle have reported to be working on the same problem considered here [4].

                                             A similar scenario occurs for the ropelength problem, the 3-dimensional analog of the ribbon-
                                          length problem [2, 5, 6, 9]. Minimum ropelength is the smallest ratio between the thickness of
                                          a tubular neighbourhood of a knot or link and its length. In this case, the unknot is minimised
                                          by a round circle and certain chain links are minimised by linked piecewise C2 loops [2].

                                             In this note, we describe a method that in some cases leads to the solution of the ribbonlength
                                          problem for flat immersed ribbon knot and link diagrams, see Fig. 1. Our method finds the
                                          tightest immersed flat ribbon knot or link diagram satisfying some simple geometric constraints.
                                          These constraints allow us to embed the space of immersed flat ribbon knots and link diagrams
                                          into a larger space of disk diagrams. The latter space has better properties and in particular,
                                          passing to a minimum length is straightforward. Moreover, we can characterise critical points
                                          of length in this larger space as piecewise C2 immersions, formed by concatenations of arcs of
                                          (unit radius) circles and straight line segments.

                                             When a minimum length disk diagram satisfies the conditions for being a ribbon knot or
                                          link, this immediately gives us the solution for the ribbonlength problem for such diagrams.
                                          We give examples where this is the case and also where the minimum length disk diagrams are

                                             Date: November 28, 2021.
                                             2000 Mathematics Subject Classification. 57M25, 57M27, 49Q10, 53C42.
                                             Key words and phrases. Knots, links, ribbons, ribbonlength, ropelength.

                                                                                                                          1
2  JOSEī AYALA, DAVID KIRSZENBLAT, AND JOACHIM HYAM RUBINSTEIN

         Figure 1. Examples of minimal ribbonlength knot and link diagrams. From
         left to right: the trefoil, Hopf link and an element of an infinite family of link
         diagrams whose ribbonlength can be computed.

not ribbon. We compute the minimal ribbonlength of some small knot and link diagrams like
the unknot, trefoil, Hopf link and an infinite family of link diagrams - see Figure 1.

   Finally using disk diagrams, we are able to give a bound on the number of crossings in a
diagram of a given knot or link which minimises ribbonlength amongst all diagrams.

                                         2. Immersed ribbon loops

   An immersion is a C1 map between manifolds whose Jacobian is injective everywhere. We
consider C1 immersed loops  : S1  R2, where the length of the derivative || || = 1/ and
S1 = [0, 1]/{0  1}, denoting the length of the loop by . We endow the space of immersed
loops with the C1 metric. A map  : X  Y is considered either as a function or its image
(X)  Y when no confusion occurs.

   The medial axis of an embedded planar loop is the locus of the centres of the circles of
maximal radii which are tangent to the loop and are inscribed in the compact region bounded
by the loop [14]. Note that the medial axis is contained in the focal cut locus, i.e the points in
the region bounded by the loop where either the distance function to the loop has zero Jacobian
or is not smooth. This locus consists of either focal conjugate points for the normal map to the
loop (where the normal map has a singular Jacobian) or focal cut points where there are several
equal length minimising normals to the loop. A simple example is an ellipse where the medial
axis or focal cut locus is a closed interval. The end points of this interval are focal conjugate
points and the interior points are focal cut points.

   In this paper, we will use an analogous concept of medial axis for an embedded planar open
or closed arc. Note that the key difference to the case of an embedded loop is that such an
arc does not separate the plane. So we do not restrict attention to one side of the arc. In
particular, the medial axis of an arc is not necessarily connected and there can be components
associated to normals on either side of the arc. So the medial axis for an arc is the locus of
centres of maximal circles touching the arc with interiors disjoint from the arc and is contained
in the focal cut locus of the arc. The medial axis of a closed arc is necessarily closed. Note
we will combine the medial axes of a finite closed arc cover of an immersed loop, obtaining a
closed set as a result.

Definition 2.1. Given a C1 immersion  : S1  R2, choose I  S1 a sufficiently small open or
closed interval such that (I) is embedded. The separation bound for  on I is the condition
that for an arbitrary point c on the medial axis of  restricted to I, ||(s) - c||  1, for all
s  I.
IMMERSED FLAT RIBBON KNOTS  3

Definition 2.2. Given a C1 immersion  : S1  R2, the weak separation bound is the
condition that for each point p = (s), there are two circles of radius 1 which touch  at p one
on each side of . In other words, the circles pass through p, have a common tangent to  at p
and locally lie on one side and the other side of  near p.

   Let T (s) and N (s), for s  S1, be a continuous choice of unit length tangent and normal
vectors to  respectively at (s). Let LT (s) = (s) + tT (s) and LN (s) = (s) + tN (s) be the
tangent and normal lines passing through (s). We define a continuous map  : S1 Ũ (-1, 1) 
R2, which is an extension of , by (s, t) = (s) + tN (s). So (s, 0) = (s), for s  S1.
The notation  will be considered either an immersion of an open annulus or its image when
no confusion occurs, assuming that  satisfies the separation bound for a collection of small
intervals covering .

Proposition 2.3. Let  : S1  R2 be an immersed loop and I  S1 be a closed interval so
that (I) is embedded and  satisfies the separation bound for  on I. If I is sufficiently small
then (I Ũ (-1, 1)) is embedded.

Proof. Suppose by way of contradiction that (s, t) = (s , t ), where (s, t) = (s , t ), s, s  I
and 0  t, t < 1. Firstly, we cannot have t = t = 0 since (I) is embedded. Next we cannot
have t = t = 0 since this would contradict the separation bound. In fact, since I is closed, in
this case we can find t = t = 0 minimal so that (s, t) = (s , t) is a point on the medial axis
at a distance at most t < 1 from .

   So it remains to deal with the case that t = t . Consider the smallest value of min{t, t } for
which (s, t) = (s , t ) for s, s  I. (We need I closed to find such a smallest value). Consider
the angle between the normal lines LN (s), LN (s ) at X = (s, t) = (s , t ). If the angle is zero
then s = s and this is impossible as the normal line is embedded. Since I is chosen as a small
closed interval, the angle between the normal lines will also be small. Now we can perturb X
to X^ along the bisector of this angle. By continuity, we claim that we can find (s^, t^) near (s, t)
and (s^ , t^) near (s , t ) so that X^ = (s^, t^) = (s^ , t^) and t^ < t, t^ < t .

   The claim follows by analysing the distance to the curve . Note that as I is small, s^, s^
will be between s, s in I. The reason is by the weak separation bound, there are two circles
of radius one which touch  at either of (s), (t) (see Figure ?). In particular,  is locally
between these circles near (s), (t) respectively. Hence if we choose an initial point X lying on
the line segment L joining these two circles and perturb it in the direction of a small angle to
this line, clearly the closest point on  to the perturbed point will move in the same direction
away from L as the perturbation of X. Hence since we have chosen the perturbation as the
bisector of the angle between the normal lines to (s), (t), we see that s^, s^ will be between
s, s in I.

   But this contradicts our choice since min{t^, t^} < min{t, t }. So this completes the proof.

Definition 2.4. Assume that  is an immersed loop satisfying the separation bound for each
of a collection of closed intervals covering S1. The crossing condition is the following re-
quirements:

      ·  and  have only double points of self-intersection. In particular,  self-intersects in
         isolated double points or double intervals (for the latter, the self-intersections are not
         transverse). Also, for any isolated double point p (or double interval J) of , there is a
         neighbourhood Up (or UJ ) so that -1(Up) = D1  D2 (or -1(UJ ) = D1  D2), where
         D1, D2 are disjoint open disks, see Fig. 2 and Fig. 3.

      · The two branches of  cross at p or J, see Fig. 2.
4  JOSEī AYALA, DAVID KIRSZENBLAT, AND JOACHIM HYAM RUBINSTEIN

   · S1 Ũ(-1, 1)\Di is contractible, for i = 1, 2. Moreover S1 Ũ(-1, 1)\D has n contractible
     components, where D consists of n pre-images of neighbourhoods of all isolated double
     points and double intervals for .

   · Di (S1 Ũ{0}) is connected for i = 1, 2. So Up  (or UJ ) consists of two intersecting
     open intervals.

   · The pre-images of all double points of  come from such pairs of disks D1, D2.

         Figure 2. The broken lines are the ribbon loop  (core) associated with the open
         ribbon , while the arrows show a branch of . The grey areas are neighbourhoods
         around self-intersections. From left to right: a ribbon self-intersecting at an
         isolated double point. A ribbon self-intersecting in a double interval. A non-
         crossing self-intersection at a double point. A non-crossing self-intersection in a
         double interval. Finally, a self-intersection not satisfying the crossing condition
         as the ribbon self-intersects but there are no associated double points or intervals
         of the core.

Definition 2.5. A C1 immersed loop  : S1  R2 satisfying the crossing condition and the
separation bound for a collection of closed intervals covering S1 is called a ribbon loop. The
immersed open annular neighbourhood (S1 Ũ (-1, 1)) of a ribbon loop (S1) is called the
ribbon associated to the loop. A finite collection of C1 loops which together satisfy these two
conditions is called a ribbon link. The space of ribbon knots and links has the standard C1
topology.

Observation 2.6.

    (1) Critical self-distance. Suppose that the normal lines LN (s), LN (t) coincide for s = t.
         Since  (s) and  (t) are parallel, we have that  (s)·((s)-(t)) =  (t)·((s)-(t)) =
         0. This gives a double critical self-distance (s) - (t) between (s), (t), [9]. We
         observe that a bound on medial axis distance implies a bound on double critical self-
         distance between such points (s), (t).

    (2) Bound on curvature. If there is a maximal radius circle with centre c which is
         tangent to  at (s) satisfying ||(s) - c|| < 1, then this implies that  does not satisfy
         the separation condition. This implies that the curvature  of  is at most 1 at all
         points where a ribbon loop or link  is C2.
            Moreover, ribbon loops or links are C1,1 curves. To see this, note for s fixed, if there
         are sufficiently close points t  S1 to s satisfying || (s) -  (t)|| > k|s - t|/ with k > 1,
         then the maximal radius circle touching the loop at (s) has radius smaller than 1,
         which again contradicts the separation condition. So this establishes that ribbon loops
         are C1,1 curves.
            Finally the same argument shows that C1 immersed loops or links satisfying the weak
         separation bound are also in the class C1,1. This will be important when we discuss
         loops in disk space.

    (3) Non-overlapping condition. Two branches of the open annular neighbourhood  of
         a ribbon loop or link  intersect only if their core components of  intersect, see Fig. 2.
IMMERSED FLAT RIBBON KNOTS  5

(4) Complementary regions. A ribbon loop or link separates the plane into open com-
     plementary connected domains each of whose boundary is a piecewise C1 polygon.

         Figure 3. For a double point p of  there is a neighbourhood Up so that
         -1(Up) = D1  D2, where D1, D2 are disjoint open disks which separate the
         annulus into contractible components. Note that (s, 0) = (s), for s  S1.

Proposition 2.7. Each complementary region of a ribbon loop or link contains an open disk
with radius 1.

Proof. Each complementary region P of a ribbon loop or link  is a union of open domains
each of whose boundary is a piecewise C1 polygon. Consider the ribbon  associated with .
(Recall we abuse notation by denoting mappings and images by the same symbol, when this
does not create confusion). It is clearly sufficient to show that P \  is non empty. For if we
can find a point c  P \  then the open disk of radius 1 centred at c is clearly in P , since 
contains all points distance < 1 from .

   Suppose by way of contradiction that P  . We claim this contradicts the crossing con-
dition satisfied by . Note that the crossing condition implies that the image of the ribbon
 deformation retracts onto the ribbon loop or link , see Fig. 2 and Fig. 3. In fact the
crossing condition shows that the image ribbon can be viewed as an open regular neighbour-
hood of the image loop or link. Hence there is an isomorphism between first homology groups
H1(, Z)  H1(, Z) induced by inclusion, where we are identifying maps with their images in
the plane. But P fills in a non-zero homologous cycle of , namely P . So if P   then the
first homology H1() would not be isomorphic to H1(). So this contradiction establishes the
result.

Observation 2.8. Proposition 2.7 does not extend to a finite collection of C1 ribbon loops
unless they collectively satisfy the ribbon conditions.

Definition 2.9. A C1 immersed planar loop or link is said to satisfy the double point con-
dition if it has finitely many isolated double points and double intervals.

Theorem 2.10. Ribbon loops and links satisfy the double point condition.

Proof. Clearly the double points (or intervals) of a C0 loop form a closed set in S1. If there
are infinitely many isolated double points or double intervals, then these accumulate at a
double point or double interval. But this contradicts the crossing condition satisfied by ribbon
loops. The explanation is the existence of disks D1, D2 associated with double points or double
intervals (see Fig 3) implies that the connected components of the set of double points in S1 are
the individual double points and double intervals, since pairs of such points and intervals are
6  JOSEī AYALA, DAVID KIRSZENBLAT, AND JOACHIM HYAM RUBINSTEIN

separated by open sets. (The closed subsets of the plane have the usual Hausdorff topology).
Hence, there cannot be an accumulation point in this set. The same argument clearly applies
to a ribbon link.

   We immediately have the following.

Corollary 2.11. A ribbon loop or link partitions the plane into a finite number of open disk
regions with exactly one being unbounded.

Definition 2.12. Disk space D is the space of finite collections of C1 immersed planar loops
satisfying the following;

      · the double point condition
      · the weak separation condition
      · there is an open disk of radius 1 contained in each complementary region. Here comple-

         mentary regions are obtained by taking the unions of complementary connected open
         domains which are adjacent at non-crossing isolated double points and intervals. (See
         Fig. 2 third and fourth diagrams).
Also D has the standard C1 topology.

   The elements in D are called disk diagrams. In particular, a ribbon loop or link is an element
of D.

Observation 2.13. A connected component of disk space D consists of all representations of a
finite collection of C1 immersed planar loops, satisfying the required properties, with the same
combinatorial type of complementary regions. Here the combinatorial type of a complementary
region is defined by splitting the region open along all non-crossing double points and intervals
using the resulting polygonal type. Equivalently, the loop or link can be perturbed to remove
all non-crossing double points and intervals and the resulting complementary domains have the
required combinatorial types.

Observation 2.14. Note that as complementary regions contain open disks of radius 1, they
cannot disappear under limits of sequences of loops. New non-crossing double points can
appear or disappear under limits, but by definition, these do not change the combinatorial type
of complementary regions.

                                        3. Ribbonlength minimisers

   For a ribbon loop  : S1  R2, we have defined the ribbon map  : S1 Ũ (-1, 1)  R2
whose image is also immersed, and abused notation by identifying a map with its image. We
use similar notation for ribbon links.

Definition 3.1. The combinatorial type of a ribbon loop or link is defined by the collection of
complementary connected domains. Two sets of domains are equivalent if there is a bijection
between them preserving the boundary structure along the loop or link, where the corresponding
polygonal types of the open complementary connected domains are isomorphic. By boundary
structure, we mean divide the boundary into arcs bounded by vertices which are either isolated
double points or ends of double intervals.

   By convention, we use representative of a given ribbon diagram to mean any ribbon diagram
with the same combinatorial type.

Definition 3.2. A ribbon diagram is cs if its core is a finite C1 concatenation of arcs of circles
of radius 1 and line segments. The complexity of a cs ribbon diagram is the number of arcs of
circles of radius 1 plus the number of line segments.
IMMERSED FLAT RIBBON KNOTS  7

Theorem 3.3. Suppose that  is a ribbon diagram. Then minimal length ribbon representatives

of  exist.

Proof. By Observation 2.6, we know that the core of a ribbon knot or link diagram is in the class
C1,1. Therefore, we can apply the Arzela-Ascoli theorem and conclude that given a sequence

i of ribbon representatives of , so that the lengths ||i|| converge to the infimum of lengths
in the class of , there are convergent subsequences of the i. The limit of such a subsequence
is a loop or link ^ which is C1 and realises the least length in the class of .

   We will show that either ^ satisfies the ribbon conditions and ^ is a representative of  or

this is true after a modification of ^ which does not change its length. We will denote the

subsequence converging to ^ by i again. For the separation bound, note that none of the loops
or links i have points in their medial axes closer than distance 1 to the loops or links. But then
it is easy to deduce the same is true for ^. To verify this, choose a sequence of maximal circles

touching each i at a point xi, so that the sequence xi converges to x on ^ and the circles are
all on sides of i corresponding to a given side of ^ at x. Then there is a subsequence of these
circles which converges to a circle touching ^ at x. So the radius of a maximal circle touching

^ at x is at least 1 as claimed. This implies that ^ satisfies the separation bound.
   For the crossing condition, we claim that double points of ^ are limits of double points for i.

Notice that the domain and image of i, ^ are open sets. If there are points (s, t) = (s , t ) with
^(s, t) = ^(s , t ) then ^(s, t) = ^(s , t ) = limi(s, t) = limi(s , t ). The image of i contains
a disk of some fixed radius about i(s, t) and similarly for i(s , t ), by convergence of i to ^.
Hence for i large enough, i(s, t), i(s , t ) are sufficiently close that these disks overlap and we
have double points of i which converge to (s, t), (s , t ) as claimed.

   Next, we can take limits of subsequences of pairs of disks D1i , D2i in the pre-image of i
corresponding to an isolated double point or double interval of i to get pairs of disks D^1, D^2
corresponding to double points or double intervals for ^ in the pre-image of ^, establishing that
^ also satisfies one of the requirements for the crossing condition. This follows using Hausdorff

convergence of subsets of the plane, see [11]. However although the complements of the disks
D^i are contractible, this does not follow necessarily for their limits D^1, D^2 - see Fig. 4b. To fix
this issue, we will need to modify ^ and this will be done later in the proof.

         Figure 4. (a) the limit of a sequence of double points for the i can lie in a
         double interval of ^. (b) two "close" double points x, x for ^. (c) the tangents to
         1, 2 may agree at x . (d) a switch between the arcs 1 and 2.

   To continue the proof of the crossing condition, we need to show the double point set S of ^
inside U^ = ^(D^1) = ^(D^2) is a single point or interval and also verify that D^i  (S1 Ũ {0}) is
connected for i = 1, 2. For the former, we claim that the double points of ^ inside U^ are either
8  JOSEī AYALA, DAVID KIRSZENBLAT, AND JOACHIM HYAM RUBINSTEIN

isolated double points or double intervals. We can suppose by passing to a subsequence that
the corresponding double points for i in Ui = i(D1i ) = i(D2i ) are a convergent set of isolated
double points or double intervals. We claim that S is either a double point or double interval
which contains the limit of the sets of double points for the i in Ui. (Note that the limit of
a sequence of double points for the i can lie in a double interval of ^ - see Fig. 4a). So the
problem is to show that S  U^ is connected - it is clearly closed and contains the limit of the
sets of double points for the i in U^ .

   Suppose that S is not connected. Since S is closed, its complement in ^  U^ is open. Then we
can choose two arcs 1, 2 of ^ with common end points x, x , where 1 = 2 = {x, x } are in
different components of S and int i is disjoint from S for i = 1, 2. We can also assume without
loss of generality that the double point component of ^ containing x, is part of the limit of

the double sets for i. We will prove that this contradicts the assumption that ^ achieves the
minimum of length amongst representatives of  if there is a non-zero angle between 1, 2 at
x. See Fig. 4b.

   We can choose two subarcs of i starting at the sequence of double points xi which converge
to x as i  , with the other ends xi, xi both converging to x . These arcs converge to the
two branches 1, 2 of ^. Moreover the tangents to 1, 2 agree at x , since clearly this is a
non-crossing double point of ^. See Fig. 4c. The key idea is to use the Meeks-Yau exchange

and round-off trick ([10]) to get a contradiction to the assumption that the length of ^ is the

infimum of lengths in the class of . This will not only eliminate the extra self-intersection of
^ but also the problem of the complement of the disks D^i failing to be contractible.

   We modify ^ in two stages. See Fig. 4d. Firstly we switch the arcs 1 and 2. Note that the
new loop is smooth at x but not at x. Next we need to `smooth the corners' at x created by

this exchange. The idea is to use two unit radius circles tangent to two branches of ^ at x as in

Fig. 5 top. We then replace parts of these branches with an arc ĩ,  of each circle to produce a
new C1 path, which is the required further modification of ^. Since radial projection onto ĩ, 

reduces length, replacement of segments of the two branches of ^ by ĩ,  decreases the length
of ^. Let us denote the further modified loop by .

         Figure 5. Top: Smoothing the corners at x. Bottom: An example where the
         centres of the unit circles are where the boundary of the ribbon ^ crosses itself.

   Next we claim that no new double points are introduced in  as compared with ^. It suffices
to show that there are no intersections of ^ and ĩ, except at the endpoints of ĩ. If we can show
IMMERSED FLAT RIBBON KNOTS  9

that ĩ,  are contained in U^ then this follows. But the centres of the unit radius circles are
where the boundary of the ribbon ^ crosses itself - see Fig. 5 bottom. Hence it is easy to see
that as well as ĩ,   U^ , the ribbon  for  is contained in ^. Moreover, the modified loop

 clearly satisfies that the modified disks D1, D2 have contractible complements - see Fig. 6.

         Figure 6. A modification of ^ such that the resultant loop  has disks D1, D2
         of contractible complements.

   For the final crossing condition for , we need to show that Dj  (S1 Ũ {0}) is connected
for j = 1, 2. We know that Dji  (S1 Ũ {0}) is connected for j = 1, 2 and for all i. Moreover
D^j is the limit of Dji as i   and ^ is the limit of i as i  . It is easy to see that the
modification of ^ to  gives D^j  (S1 Ũ {0}) = Dj  (S1 Ũ {0}) and so we see immediately that
this is also connected. So this completes the proof that ^ or  satisfies this crossing condition.

   Hence we have shown that the assumptions that the crossing condition is a single double
point or interval for ^ in U^ is violated and the angle at x between the branches of ^ is non-zero

lead to a contradiction.

   It remains to consider the case that the angle at x between the branches of ^ is zero. In

this case, suppose without loss of generality that 1|  2 . We modify ^ by replacing 2
with a copy of 1. Hence for the modified loop, which we denote again by , the double set
now contains 1 and the length is at most that of ^. We can continue doing this if there are
further such pairs of branches of  with ends which are tangential, until no such branches

occur. This clearly gives a new loop in the same class as  with minimum length. Moreover
for this modified loop, we see that D^j  (S1 Ũ {0}) = Dj  (S1 Ũ {0}) is connected and the
complement of Dj is contractible - see Fig. 6.

   So this completes the proof of all parts of the crossing condition for  and the argument

also shows that it is in the same diagram class as .

Definition 3.4. The ribbonlength Rib() of a ribbon knot or link  is the ratio of the length
of the core  to the width of the ribbon ,

         Length() Length()
Rib() =           =
         Width()     2

                                   4. Length minimisers in disk space

Theorem 4.1. (1) Length minimisers in disk space exist and are cs.
    (2) Suppose that a length minimiser of a ribbon knot or link in disk space is ribbon. Then
         this disk space minimiser is also a length minimiser in ribbon space.

Proof. By Proposition 2.7, Observation 2.8 and Theorem 2.10 all the ribbon loop diagrams or
link diagrams in a given class are contained in a component of disk space, which we will denote
10  JOSEī AYALA, DAVID KIRSZENBLAT, AND JOACHIM HYAM RUBINSTEIN

by D. Here we abuse notation by using  as both a single realisation of a given ribbon loop
or link diagram or the class of such realisations.

   Firstly, we need to prove that D has length minimisers. Later on we will show that such
minimisers are of cs type. Firstly in disk space, loops satisfy the weak separation bound, so by
Observation 2.6 and the Arzela-Ascoli theorem, we can find a C1 limit ^ of a sequence of loops
or links i in D whose lengths converge to the infimum of length. To show that ^ is in D,
we need to first establish that ^ satisfies the weak separation condition. This follows by the
approach in Theorem 3.3. In particular at a sequence of points xi on i converging to x on ^,
there are two circles of radius one which touch i at xi on either side. These circles converge to
a similar pair of circles touching ^ at x on each side, establishing the weak separation condition.

   Note that the double points of ^ don't necessarily exactly match those of i under taking
limits. There are two ambiguities in the matchings. The first is that isolated double points
may switch with double intervals. The second is that new non-crossing double points or double
intervals may appear in the limit ^. However it is still true that the complementary regions
of ^ match those of members of i under limits and there are still unit radius disks in these
regions for ^, by taking limits of such disks in the corresponding regions of i. (Recall that non-
crossing double points and double intervals do not separate complementary regions, so having
new such points and intervals in ^ does not change the class of loop or link). Consequently,
this completes the proof that minimisers of length exist in D.

   Clearly it suffices to show that C1 minimisers of length in D are always of cs type, to
complete the first part of the Theorem.

         Figure 7. Left: The subarc  does not touch the unit radius disks (in grey) in
         the complementary regions for ^ on either side of . Right: We shorten  by
         replacing it by a Dubins solution of type csc (circle-line segment-circle).

   The argument that a C1 length minimiser ^ of D is of cs type is by contradiction. We can
divide ^ into a finite collection of short subarcs with the following properties. Suppose first one
of the short subarcs  of ^ does not touch the unit radius disks in the complementary regions
for ^ on either side of . We can then shorten  by replacing it by a Dubins solution (see [1]
and Fig. 7) with the same endpoints and end directions as  if the latter is not of cs type. We
can choose the subarcs so that any such a  is short enough relative to its distance from the
adjacent unit radius disks, so that the Dubins solution will also miss these disks.

   We also need to consider subarcs  of ^ with one or both ends on a unit radius disk in a
complementary region, so that the interior of  is disjoint from any of these disks. Again if 
is short enough and not of cs type, then we can replace it by a Dubins solution with the same
endpoints and end directions as  so that the new arc has still has interior disjoint from these
disks. See Fig. 7 and [1]. Note that the unit disks at the ends of  are tangential to .

   Hence we have found a shorter loop or link in D, contradicting our choice of ^ as shortest.
   Next, by the above argument it follows that ^ is a collection of Dubins solutions possibly
connecting points on the boundaries of the unit disks in the complementary regions. Moreover
at these unit disk boundary points, ^ must be tangent to the unit circles. To conclude that
IMMERSED FLAT RIBBON KNOTS  11

^ is cs, it remains to verify it is a finite concatenation of Dubins curves together with arcs of
unit disks joined smoothly together. If there were infinitely many Dubins curves, then these
would end at infinitely many points on the boundary of the unit disks. Such points would
accumulate. But if two such points are very close, it is easy to see [1] that any embedded
Dubins curve joining them is the arc of the unit circle. Hence at an accumulation point, we
would have such arcs joining up smoothly and hence do get a finite number of Dubins curves
as required, unless infinitely many of these arcs had self intersections. But in the latter case, ^
would have infinitely many self-crossing points, which is a contradiction. So this establishes a
ribbon length minimiser is of cs type and is in D.

   By assumption, if the ribbon conditions of separation and crossing are satisfied by this disk
length minimiser, then this provides a ribbon length minimiser, since disk space contains ribbon
space. This completes the proof.

                                          5. Variational approach

   In this section we study critical points of length for elements in disk space D. Then in Section
6 we will show how the ribbonlength varies as the knot diagram changes, so long as the length
minimiser in disk space is a ribbon loop.

   A useful physical model for studying critical points of length for loops in D is a finite collection
of n unit radius disks (each of these corresponds to a bounded complementary region of the
loop) and an elastic band being the loop itself. For each of the n disks, there are two degrees of
freedom, which are the coordinates of its centre. Accordingly, the configuration space is a subset
of R2n. In addition, there is a distance constraint, that the centres of a pair of unit disks must
be separated by a distance of at least 2 (see also Proposition 2.7). Our approach is based on the
following proposition from the work of Kirszenblat et. al. on minimal curvature-constrained
networks [8] inspired by the work of Rubinstein and Thomas on Steiner trees [12].

         Figure 8. Left: an illustration of Proposition 5.1. The other illustrations are
         for Proposition 5.2.

Proposition 5.1. Suppose that p1p2p3 is a smooth curve consisting of a concatenation of an
arc of a unit circle and a line segment with common point p2 such that p1 is held fixed while
p3 is varied, as shown in Fig. 8 left. Then the first variation of length of p1p2p3 is the inner
product between the direction of variation and the unit vector from p2 to p3.

Proof. Suppose that p3 moves along any smooth curve with derivative at its initial position
being the vector v. Let denote the length of p1p2p3. The curve p1p2, of length , is an arc of
a unit circle whose centre c is considered the origin.

   Let n^ be the unit vector from the origin to the point p2 and x the vector from p2 to p3, with
length denoted by x and unit vector in the direction of x denoted by x^. Observe that the first
variation of the vector x is equal to the first variation of its head v minus the first variation of
12        JOSEī AYALA, DAVID KIRSZENBLAT, AND JOACHIM HYAM RUBINSTEIN

its tail n^. If the point p3 is perturbed in the direction of v, then the first variation of length of
p1p2p3 is

                                                = +x
                                                = n^ · x^ + x · x^
                                                = n^ · x^ + (v - n^ ) · x^
                                                = v · x^

    As a consequence of Proposition 5.1, we obtain the following proposition.

Proposition 5.2. Suppose that p1p2p3p4 is a smooth curve consisting of a concatenation of an
arc of a unit radius circle with centre c1 (fixed), followed by a line segment, followed by an arc
of a unit radius circle with centre c2 (variable), as shown in Fig. 8. Then the first variation
of length of p1p2p3p4 is the scalar product between the vector of variation and the unit vector
from p2 to p3.

Proof. Suppose that the centre c2 (respectively the point p4) moves along any smooth curve
with derivative at its initial position being the vector v (respectively a parallel translation of

this curve with the derivative v at p4). Let denote the length of the curve p1p2p3p4. We may
view the case where the line segment has zero length as a limiting case, see Fig. 8 right. In

this case, the points p2 and p3 coincide and we define the unit vector x^ to be tangent to the
disks at the point p2 and pointing in the direction of motion along the curve when traveling
from the point p1 toward the point p4. Let m denote the midpoint of the straight segment p2p3,
which coincides with the points p2 and p3 if the straight segment is degenerate. Let 1 and 2
denote the respective lengths of the curves p1p2m and mp3p4, both of which are curves as in
Proposition 5.1. Observe that the first variation of the midpoint m is half that of the centre c2.
By proposition 5.1, if the point m is perturbed in the direction of v/2, then the first variation

of length of p1p2m is

                                                   1        x^
                                                =   v    ·
                                             1     2

On the other hand, if we subtract v from all elements in Fig 8, then we see that the first

variation of length of mp3p4 is

                                          2     =  -  1  v  ·   -x^
                                                      2

                                                   =  1  v  ·   x^
                                                      2

Summing these two terms, we obtain for the first variation of length of p1p2p3p4

                                          = 1 + 2 = v · x^

Observation 5.3. We have established that minimal length elements in disk space D must be cs

disk diagrams, in Theorem 4.1 . To compute the first variation of the length of a cs disk diagram

(as the positions of the disks are varied) we first decompose the cs disk diagram into curves, each

of which is a concatenation of an arc of a unit radius circle, followed by a line segment, followed

by an arc of a unit radius circle as in Proposition 5.2. Then, we simply add the contributions

coming from each piece in this decomposition. Concretely, suppose that the ith disk moves

along  a  smooth  curve  t    c(t)    R2  with  velocity       vector  v  =  dc  while  the  remaining  disks  are
                                                                             dt

held fixed. Moreover, suppose that there are 2k (possibly degenerate) straight segments lying

tangent to the ith disk with outward pointing unit vectors u^1, u^2, . . . , u^2k, see Fig. 9. Let
IMMERSED FLAT RIBBON KNOTS  13

denote the length of the loop  and (x2i-1, x2i) the centre of the ith disk. Then the directional
derivative D (v) of in the direction of v at the configuration point x = (x1, x2, . . . , x2n) is
given by

          D (v) = lim (x1, x2, . . . , x2i-1 + c1(t), x2i + c2(t), . . . , x2n) - (x1, x2, . . . , x2n)
                                 t0+
                   = (u^1 + u^2 + . . . + u^2k) · v.

                                                     Figure 9.

                              6. Examples of ribbonlength minimisers

   We compute the minimal ribbonlength for some small knot and link diagrams. We discuss
the minimal ribbonlength of the standard figure-8 knot diagram and observe that there exists a
minimum length disk diagram that does not satisfy the separation bound. We give a conjecture
about the minimal ribbonlength for the standard figure-8 knot diagram. We finish this section
by providing an infinite family of link diagrams whose minimal ribbonlength can be easily
computed.

6.1. The minimal ribbonlength of the unknot.
   Since Length() = 2, the ribbonlength of the unknot is clearly Rib(unknot) =  for the

standard diagram , see Fig. 10. We will see in the next section that this is also the minimal
ribbon length over all diagrams of the unknot.

         Figure 10. Left: the ribbon knot of minimal ribbonlength for the standard
         unknot diagram. Right: the ribbon knot of minimal ribbonlength for the standard
         unknot with one twist.

6.1.1. The twisted unknot. We compute the effect of a twist on the ribbonlength of the unknot.
See Fig. 10. Without loss of generality, consider the disk diagram in Fig. 11 (a), and fix the
position of D0. We claim that D1 must touch D0 at a single point. Suppose to the contrary
that D1 does not touch D0. Let the contribution to the negative gradient of length from the
centre of D1 be denoted by u. If D0 and D1 do not touch, we can always decrease the length
of the disk diagram by perturbing the disk D1 in the direction of the negative gradient u.
14  JOSEī AYALA, DAVID KIRSZENBLAT, AND JOACHIM HYAM RUBINSTEIN

In addition, since D0 and D1 belong to different regions separated by the disk diagram, the
distance between their centres is at least 2. We conclude that D0 and D1 intersect at a single
point. It is easy to see that the minimal length disk diagram is in fact a minimal length ribbon
loop. Since the length of the minimal ribbon loop is 4, the ribbonlength of a twisted unknot
is 2.

   In general, a twist adds 2 to the length of a minimal disk diagram by a similar argument.

6.2. The minimal ribbonlength of the standard trefoil knot diagram.
   We will prove that the disk diagram for the standard trefoil diagram in Fig. 12 left is a length

minimising ribbon loop. The disks are labelled D0, D1, D2 and D3 as in Fig. 11 (b)-(d). Let us
fix the position of the disk D0. We will show that each of the three disks D1, D2 and D3 touches
the disk D0 and a length minimising loop is connected to it by straight segments. Suppose to
the contrary that one of the three disks D1, D2 and D3, say D2, touches no other disks. In
order for the disk D2 to be in mechanical equilibrium, meaning that we cannot decrease the
length of the curve by perturbing the disk D2, the disk diagram must be as in Fig. 12 (b).
In this case, the disk D2 is connected to the disk D0 by two straight segments and to each
of the disks D1 and D3 by one straight segment. We can decrease the length of the curve by
perturbing one of the two disks D1 and D3, say D1, in the direction of a vector v which makes
an acute angle with the negative gradient.

   Next, suppose that one of the three disks D1, D2 and D3, say D2, is prevented from touching
the disk D0 by at least one of the two disks D1 and D3, see Fig. 11 (c). In this case, we cannot
perturb the disk D1 in the direction of the negative gradient, because it will intersect the disk
D0. However, we can perturb the disk D1 in the direction of a vector v which makes an acute
angle with the negative gradient in order to decrease the length of the curve.

   Finally, suppose that each of the disks D1, D2 and D3 touches the disk D0, but that at least
one of the disks D1, D2 and D3, say D2, is not connected to the disk D0 by straight segments,
see Fig. 11 (d). In this case, we can perturb one of the disks D1 or D3 in the direction of a
vector v which makes an acute angle with the negative gradient in order to decrease the length
of the curve.

   Observe that there is a 2-parameter family of length minimisers that is obtained by rotating
two of the three disks D1, D2 and D3 about the disk D0. To see this, observe that the contri-
bution to the negative gradient from the position of, say, the disk D1, which we denote by u,
points from the centre of the disk D1 to that of the disk D0. Since the disk D0 is held fixed,
the smallest admissible angle between the vectors u and v, i.e. the perturbation vector, is /2.
That is, the rate of change of the length of the core  is at least zero. This is true so long as
we rotate the disk D1 about the disk D0 in some neighbourhood of the original configuration.

   In Fig. 11 (h) we illustrate the other minimal crossing disk diagram for the trefoil. This
cannot be a ribbon loop since it violates, for example, the separation bound since ||p0 -p1|| < 2.

   Since Length() = 12+4, the ribbonlength of the standard trefoil knot diagram is Rib(trefoil) =
6 + 2.

Observation 6.1. Tangential crossings do not separate disk regions. Recall that in
Definition 2.12 we allowed crossings to be tangential in disk space. Consider three simple
loops with an intersection pattern like that of three Olympic circles (a planar projection of the
Borromean rings). Note that a minimal double point representative of this diagram separates
the plane into six regions, one of which is unbounded. A tight disk diagram for the three
Olympic circles is shown in Fig. 11 (i). Therefore the length minimiser in disk space divides
the plane into seven connected domains, two of which are separated by a tangential crossing
IMMERSED FLAT RIBBON KNOTS  15

         Figure 11. The black trace represents a disk diagram for the standard trefoil
         knot diagram for (b)-(d) and for the standard Hopf link diagram for (e)-(g). The
         vector u denotes a contribution to the negative gradient for the length of a disk
         diagram. The centre of D1 moves along a smooth curve with derivative at its
         initial position being the vector v. The illustration (h) is a minimal crossing
         trefoil disk diagram that violates the separation bound as ||p0 - p1|| < 2. In (i)
         the green portions are part of the same region as p is a tangential (fake) crossing.
         The disk D2 is obtained from Proposition 2.7, see Observation 6.1.

         Figure 12. Left: A length minimising ribbon loop (core) for the standard trefoil
         diagram. Right: a ribbon knot of minimal ribbonlength for this trefoil diagram.
denoted by p. In Fig. 11 (i) the green portions are part of the same complementary region and
D2 is the disk obtained from Proposition 2.7.
16  JOSEī AYALA, DAVID KIRSZENBLAT, AND JOACHIM HYAM RUBINSTEIN

6.3. The minimal ribbonlength for the standard Hopf link diagram.
   We will prove that the disk diagram corresponding to the standard Hopf link diagram in Fig.

13 left is a length minimising ribbon loop. The disks are labelled D0, D1 and D2 as in Fig 11
(e)-(g). Let us fix the position of the disk D0. We will show that each of the two disks D1 and
D2 touches the disk D0 and is connected to it by straight segments for a length minimising
representative. Suppose to the contrary that at least one of the two disks D1 and D2, say D1,
does not touch the disk D0. In particular, the disk D1 touches no other disks. In Fig. 11 (e),
the contribution to the negative gradient from the position of the disk D1 is denoted by u. We
can decrease the length of the curve by perturbing the disk D1 in the direction of the negative
gradient. Similarly, if the two disks D1 and D2 touch one another but do not touch the disk
D0, then we can perturb the two disks D1 and D2 collectively in the direction of the negative
gradient.

   Next, suppose that one of the two disks D1 and D2, say D1, serves as an obstacle preventing
the disk D2 from touching the disk D0, see Fig.11 (f ). Let u denote the contribution to the
negative gradient from the position of the disk D1. In this case, we cannot perturb the disk
D1 in the direction of the negative gradient, because it touches the disk D0. However, we can
perturb the disk D1 in the direction of a vector v which makes an acute angle with the vector
u. In this way, we can decrease the length of the curve.

   Finally, suppose that both of the disks D1 and D2 touch the disk D0, but that neither of the
two disks D1 and D2 is connected to the disk D0 by straight segments, see Fig. 11 (g). In this
case, we can perturb the disk D1 in the direction of a vector v which makes an acute angle
with the negative gradient in order to decrease the length of the curve.

   Since Length() = 8+4, the ribbonlength of the standard Hopf link diagram is Rib(Hopf link) =
4 + 2.

         Figure 13. Left: A length minimising ribbon loop (core) for the standard Hopf
         link diagram. Note that there is a 1-parameter family of minimisers (up to
         isometries) that is obtained by rotating D1 or D2 about the disk D0. Right: the
         ribbon link of minimal ribbonlength for the standard Hopf link diagram.

6.4. On the ribbonlength of the standard figure-8 knot diagram.
   Regarding the disk diagram for the standard figure-8 knot diagram, there is a simple ar-

gument to show that the configuration depicted in Fig. 14 left, where the centresof the
disks D0, D1, D2, D3 and D4 are positioned at the points (0, 0), (- 3, -1), (0, -2), ( 3, -1)
and (0, 2), respectively, gives a minimum length element in disk space D. To see this, observe
that we can decompose the core  into three loops 1, 2 and 3 as in Fig. 14. By a variational
argument similar to those given above, it is clear that the respective lengths of the loops 1, 2
and 3 must be at least 2, 4 + 2 and 8 +  due to the number of disks contained inside each
of the three loops. Since the configuration depicted in Fig. 14 left attains all three bounds, it
IMMERSED FLAT RIBBON KNOTS     17

gives a minimum length element in disk space D for disk diagrams of the combinatorial type of
the standard figure-8 knot diagram. The corresponding ribbon is illustrated in Fig. 15. Note
there is a 1-parameter family of length minimisers that is obtained by rotating the disk D4
about the disk D0.

=  +                        +

         Figure 14. A decomposition of a minimal disk diagram for the standard figure-8
         knot diagram.

Observation 6.2. The previous example of a minimiser in D for disk diagrams with the com-
binatorial type of the standard figure-8 knot diagram violates the non-overlapping condition.
This configuration of disks does not lead to a ribbon knot diagram since the associated ribbon
loop violates the separation condition ||p0 - p1|| < 2, and consequently, the ribbon violates
the non-overlapping condition, see Fig. 15. Observe that one segment of the ribbon overlaps
another in a coloured wedge in Fig. 15 (left), even though the corresponding core components
do not intersect one another. A third ribbon segment lies above one of the two segments and
beneath the other. The non-overlapping condition places an additional constraint on the disk
diagram required for it to be ribbon.

   A conjectured minimiser that satisfies the non-overlapping condition is depicted in Fig. 15
at right, wherethe centres of the disks D0, D1, D2, D3 and D4 are positioned at the points
(0, 0), (- 2, - 2), (0, -2 2), ( 2, - 2) and (0, 2), respectively.

6.5. Minimal length for the standard Whitehead link diagram in disk space.
   In the case of the standard Whitehead link diagram, we may apply a similar decomposition

argument but we again run into the non-overlapping condition. That is, we can decompose the
core  into three loops, two of which contain two disks and one of which contains four disks. By
a variational argument, it is easy to see that the respective lengths of the loops must be at least
4 + 2, 4 + 2 and 8 + 2 due to the number of disks contained inside each of the three loops.
Since the configuration depicted in Fig. 12 left attains all three bounds, it gives a minimum
length element in disk space D for disk diagrams of the combinatorial type of the standard
Whitehead link diagram. The corresponding ribbon is illustrated in Fig. 12. Note there is a
2-parameter family of length minimisers that is obtained by rotating the disk D1 about the
disk D0 and the disk D3 about the disk D2. Since Length() = 16 + 6, the minimium length
of the standard Whitehead link diagram in disk space is Rib(Whitehead link) = 8 + 3.

6.6. Minimal length in disk space for diagram family 1.
   Each member of the infinite family of link diagrams F1, an example of which is depicted in

Fig. 17, comprises n Whitehead links concatenated via nugatory crossings. For this choice of
18  JOSEī AYALA, DAVID KIRSZENBLAT, AND JOACHIM HYAM RUBINSTEIN

    Figure 15. From left to right: a length minimising disk diagram in D with the
    combinatorial type of the standard figure-8 knot diagram. The ribbon associated
    with the core is at the left. The coloured wedge illustrates an overlap between
    two branches of the ribbon. A conjectured length minimising ribbon loop for
    the standard figure-8 knot diagram on the right. The conjectured ribbon knot
    associated with the ribbon loop on the right.

         Figure 16. Left: A length minimising core for the standard Whitehead link dia-
         gram in disk space. Right: the corresponding ribbon for the standard Whitehead
         link diagram, violating the non-overlapping condition.

knot diagram as in Fig. 17, we show via a decomposition argument that the minimum length
of the family F1 of link diagrams in disk space is

                             Rib(F1) = Rib(Whitehead link) Ũ n = (8 + 3)n.

To see this, observe that the core can be decomposed into 2n loops, each of which contains two
disks, in addition to n loops, each of which contains four disks. By a variational argument, a
loop containing two disks must be of length at least 4 + 2, whereas a loop containing four
disks must be of length at least 8 + 2. Since the geometric realisation of the link diagram
depicted in the Fig. 17 attains the above bounds, it must give a minimum for the length of
this particular diagram in disk space.

6.7. Minimal ribbonlength for diagram family 2.
   Each member of the infinite family of link diagrams F2, an example of which is depicted in

Fig. 18, comprises n Hopf links concatenated via nugatory crossings. Observe that the core
IMMERSED FLAT RIBBON KNOTS  19

         Figure 17. Here the core does not satisfy the separation bound. So the ribbon
         is overlapping and this only gives the minimum length in disk space and is not a
         ribbon link diagram
can be decomposed into 2n loops, each of which contains two disks. By following a pattern of
argument similar to that provided for the previous example, it is easy to see that the minimum
length of the family of link diagrams F2 amongst all disk diagrams is

                                 Rib(F1) = Rib(Hopf link) Ũ n = (4 + 2)n.

         Figure 18. Here the core obeys the separation bound, so the ribbon satisfies
         the non-overlapping condition. So this gives the minimum ribbon length diagrams
20                 JOSEī AYALA, DAVID KIRSZENBLAT, AND JOACHIM HYAM RUBINSTEIN

7. Bounding the crossing number of minimal length knot and link ribbon and
                                                    disk diagrams

   In this section, the aim is to give a useful bound on the crossing number of a projection of
a knot or link which minimises ribbonlength amongst ribbon diagrams or length amongst disk
diagrams. In this way, if the procedures of the previous sections could be made more efficient,
then a practical method would follow for computing minimum ribbon length amongst all ribbon
diagrams of a given knot or link, or the minimum length amongst all disk diagrams of a fixed
knot or link. These both give (geometrical) invariants of knots and links, but the difficulty is
to have a practical process for computing these minimum lengths. To illustrate the theory, we
bound the crossing numbers for the trefoil knot and the Hopf link. But only for the trefoil knot,
is the bound strong enough to immediately conclude that the minimum ribbon length can be
computed over all diagrams. For the Hopf link, all diagrams with at most 4 crossings need to
be examined.

Theorem 7.1. Suppose that K is a knot or link in R3 and  is a ribbon (respectively disk)
planar projection with length . Then a planar projection of K which minimises ribbon length
(respectively length) amongst all ribbon diagrams (respectively disk diagrams) has at most

                                  [-  1  4
                                         (1 + ) - 1 ]
                                  2      

crossings.

Proof. Suppose a planar projection  is ribbon (respectively disk) with c transverse crossings
and with minimum length amongst all ribbon (respectively disk) diagrams. Note we will slightly
perturb any planar diagram to only have transverse crossings, eliminating any non-transverse
crossings and replacing a crossing consisting of an interval of double points by a single transverse
point or the empty set. See Figure 2, where the crossings in the right figures three and four
get eliminated. Then  forms a graph G with c vertices of degree 4 and hence 2c edges joining
the vertices.

   Since the Euler characteristic of the plane is one, we see that  must have c + 1 bounded
complementary regions. Now by Proposition 2.7 if  is a ribbon projection, then each bounded
complementary region contains a unit disk, i.e the projection is a disk diagram. Hence each of
the bounded complementary regions has area at least at least . By the isoperimetric inequality,
each bounded complementary region has boundary length at least 2. Adding up the lengths
of the boundaries of the bounded complementary regions gives at least 2(c + 1).

   Let us denote by G the subgraph of G consisting of edges which are in the boundary of
a single bounded complementary region of . The edges of G^ = G \ G will be referred
to as internal edges of G and clearly are in the boundary of two bounded complementary
regions of . Hence the sum of the lengths of the boundaries of the bounded complementary
regions is G + 2 G^ . Combining, we get 2 = 2   2  = 2 G = 2 G + 2 G^ 
2(c + 1) + G .

   Next, we know that the area enclosed by G is at least (c + 1). By another application
of the isoperimetric inequality, this implies G  2 (c + 1). Putting this together with
the inequality above, we get 2  2(c + 1) + 2 (c + 1). This can be rewritten as  
c + 1 + (c + 1). Now this quadratic inequality is easily solved giving the final result c 

    -  1    (1  +  4  )  -  1  .
       2           
     IMMERSED FLAT RIBBON KNOTS                                     21

Example 7.2. For the standard projection of the trefoil knot, we found in 6.2 that the minimum
ribbon length is 6 + 2. So putting twice this length into Theorem 7.1

   12 + 4 1      4(12 + 4)
c    -       1+                                          - 1  5.47
        2        

So to verify that the minimum ribbon length is that of the standard projection, it suffices to

check diagrams of the trefoil with at most 5 crossings.

Example 7.3. For the standard projection of the Hopf link, we found in 6.3 that the minimum
ribbon length is 4 + 2. So putting twice this length into Theorem 7.1 gives

c  8 + 4 1       4(8 + 4)                                - 1  4.43
     -       1+
   2             

So to verify that the minimum ribbon length is that of the standard projection, it suffices

to check diagrams of the Hopf links with at most 4 crossings. The standard diagram has 2
crossings.

                                                   8. Discussion

   There are three different classes of planar knot and link diagrams considered in this paper.
The first class are ribbon knots and links which satisfy the separation bound and crossing
condition. The second are diagrams which lie in disk space, i.e there is a unit disk in each
complementary bounded region. Finally, a link which is a finite collection of ribbon knot
diagrams gives a weaker condition than for ribbon links. So this gives a third class of diagrams.

   However, to obtain the crucial Proposition 2.7 it is clear that the weaker property of a link
being a finite union of ribbon knots is not sufficient. Hence we cannot embed our problem into
disk space using this weaker property. The advantage of using disk space is Theorem 4.1. This
result shows that if a disk space length minimiser is ribbon, then this diagram is a concatenation
of arcs of circles of radius one and straight line segments.

   Note also that the proof of Proposition 2.7 uses an important property of ribbon knots and
links, namely that the ribbon deformation retracts onto the core of the knot or link. This latter
property is implied by the crossing condition. In fact, we chose the crossing condition with this
property in mind.

   In work in progress, the first and third authors will introduce a new mathematical model
of physical knots and links. The current paper is related to this project in that we have tried
to produce a model of ribbon knots and links in the plane with similar properties to the 3-
dimensional model, which is harder to solve. However, two nice features of the 3-dimensional
model are that `ropelength' minimisers always exist and have good regularity properties for
any knot or link type. Moreover for the Sussmann problem, see [13], namely finding a shortest
length path between two nearby points with initial and final directions not differing too much,
in our 3-dimensional model the solution is a concatenation of arcs of circles of radius one and
straight line segments. However we are not able to compute length minimisers for any knots
and links, except for the unknot.

   Next, the bound obtained in Theorem 7.1 is most likely not optimal. It would be interesting
to refine the bound, using more properties of ribbon and disk space length minimisers. The
proof of Theorem 7.1 only uses the isoperimetric inequality. By bringing the bound closer to
the minimum crossing number, e.g for alternating knots and links, this would give a much more
efficient approach to computing the minimum ribbon and disk length over all planar diagrams.
22  JOSEī AYALA, DAVID KIRSZENBLAT, AND JOACHIM HYAM RUBINSTEIN

                                                    References

[1] J. Ayala, D. Kirszenblat, J.H. Rubinstein, A geometric approach to shortest bounded curvature paths,
 Communications in Analysis and Geometry, 26, (4), (2018), 679­697.
[2] J. Cantarella, R.B. Kusner, J.M. Sullivan, On the minimum ropelength of knots and links, Invent. Math.
 150 (2002) 257­286.
[3] E. Denne, Folded ribbon knots in the plane, arXiv:1807.00691v1.
[4] E. Denne, J. M. Sullivan and N. C. Wrinkle, The ribbonlength of knot diagrams, Preliminary report 1132-
 54-316, https://www.ams.org/amsmtgs/2240_abstracts/1132-54-316.pdf
[5] Y. Diao, C. Ernst, and E. J. Janse van Rensburg, Thickness of knots, Math. Proc. Camb. Phil. Soc. 126,
 (1999), 293­310.
[6] O. Gonzalez, J.H. Maddocks, Global curvature, thickness, and the ideal shapes of knots. Proc. Nat. Acad.
 Sci. (USA) 96, (1999), 4769­4773.
[7] L.H. Kauffman, Minimal flat knotted ribbons, Physical and numerical models in knot theory, Singapore,
 World Sci. Publ. (2005), Vol 36 Ser. Knots Everything, 495­506.
[8] D. Kirszenblat and K. G. Sirinanda, M. Brazil, P. A. Grossman, J. H. Rubinstein and D. A. Thomas,
 Minimal curvature-constrained networks, J. Global Optimization 72 (2018), 71­87.
[9] R.A. Litherland, J. Simon, O. Durumeric, E. Rawdon, Thickness of Knots, Topology and its Applications
 91, (1999), 233­244.
[10] W. Meeks and S.T. Yau, Topology of three dimensional manifolds and the embedding problems in minimal
 surface theory. Annals of Mathematics. 112 (3): (1982), 441­484.
[11] J. Munkres, Topology (2nd ed.) Prentice Hall.,(1999) pp. 280­281.
[12] J. H. Rubinstein, D. A. Thomas, A variational approach to the Steiner ratio conjecture, 33, Ann Oper Res
 (1991) 481­499. https://doi.org/10.1007/BF02071984
[13] H. Sussmann, Shortest 3-dimensional paths with a prescribed curvature bound, Proceedings of the 34th
 IEEE conference on Decision and Control, 1995,
[14] L. Younes. Shapes and Diffeomorphisms. Springer, 2010.

   Facultad de Ciencias, Universidad Arturo Prat, Iquique, Chile

   School of Mathematics and Statistics, University of Melbourne Parkville, VIC 3010 Aus-
tralia

   E-mail address: jayalhoff@gmail.com

   School of Mathematics and Statistics, University of Melbourne Parkville, VIC 3010 Aus-
tralia

   E-mail address: d.kirszenblat@student.unimelb.edu.au

   School of Mathematics and Statistics, University of Melbourne Parkville, VIC 3010 Aus-
tralia

   E-mail address: joachim@unimelb.edu.au
